# ANNEX II

## TWO FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS: DTF AND PRIMARY MONEY ISSUANCE

**By Mauricio Rivadeneira Mora**

It is possible to demonstrate that the basic problems of our economy can be better solved if we control the two parameters namely: the interest rate (DTF) by eliminating it, and primary money issuance by reviving it.

It was already demonstrated in the December 15 edition on page 11 of Portafolio that the interest rate should be as low as possible in order to encourage savings. Now let's see what the DTF, or deposit interest rate in Colombia, really means. An example will illustrate the chain.

If a saver has $100 million pesos and receives $24 million as interest in a year for depositing them in a bank, unquestionably the system is maintaining drones. Paying someone for doing nothing reflects that something is not right, starting because that money has to be generated by the system with much effort which means a sacrifice of something or someone.

Only an entrepreneur can make a setup that generates money. If this person borrows the $100 million to work in their company, they will have to pay the $24 million annually for as long as they want the loan, plus $10 million additional that the bank where they request the operation will charge them. That is, $34 million in interest alone. The bank ultimately does work, so it has some reason. But paying $24 million to someone who does nothing, although it's not their fault, is unprecedented. No developed country does this because of the social costs this represents.

We can ask ourselves how the system can pay that amount if normally companies from sales of $100 million pesos receive a profit after taxes that can be around 10%. That is, $10 million. It is very difficult to find businesses in Colombia that give more than this amount. In difficult times it is much less, and even negative rates are reached. It all depends on competition. Given the proportions, we could legitimately say that there is no company that can pay 34% interest. But since the system effectively pays them, it is necessary to find out how it does it, or know who makes the sacrifice, or what the social cost is. The point is that someone has to pay it, because nothing can come from nothing.

Indeed, the law of demand illustrates that the fewer units there are in the market, the higher the price of the respective products will be. Many people behind a unique product will be willing to pay a very high price. And in this situation, that high price will allow larger profits for companies, which would make it possible to pay the interest.

But the effect of manufacturing few quantities to have the highest prices implies not giving work to all the population that requires it. That is, it implies that the system must have some belts of misery, people suffering hunger and placed as in a showcase, that forces others to say: "I pay whatever it takes not to see myself in that situation." And all for that interest rate paid to the "saver" for doing nothing. Just for having the money. It's as if for having an uninhabited house worth $100 million the government had to pay $24 to its owner.

If the system paid less, there would be no problem. The saver would invest in industry, since this decrease in interest would increase the profit of entrepreneurs, competition would be revitalized which would increase the quantities offered in the market, and for that employment would have to be increased.

Now, if an entrepreneur has to pay very high interest, and at the same time, the floodgates of the international market are opened in such a way that competition can enter with lower prices for not having to pay those interests, evidently their sentence will be signed. The problem now is that they won't even be able to provide few jobs, they will be forced to disappear from the market, since there is no fair competition. It's not that our workforce is not competitive in costs. The structural imbalance is in the system's deposit interest, which reverts as a cost for both banking and industry.

Indeed, the act of decreasing the DTF, contrary to general belief, does not imply that money flees abroad, except for speculative money which among other things is better if it goes away, but would invite savers to make investments directly in industry, since there would be field to develop it immensely. To see the proportions is a matter of comparing the percentages of 8% which is an industrial average of direct labor cost in companies, against 24% which would be the new possibility of development for industry if we lower that cost.

Perhaps people wonder what will happen to savings, but the truth is that in Colombia the ability to save, that is, people who after covering all their expenses still have money left over, are very few. Families with the ability to save in Colombia do not exceed 10%, and generally coincide with people who are entrepreneurs. That is, those who know how to move industry and business in general, giving jobs to the population. These people are not going to keep the money under the mattress, nor are they going to make it disappear for banking. On the contrary, they are going to increase business, since in principle the 24% cost decrease will be reflected in an increase in profitability.

We have demonstrated that the DTF in the proportions we maintain it in Colombia is a direct cause of misery and impossibility of getting work for many families, who in their desperation and without hope only have the option to subsist, either in informal work, in the illegal market, or any other despicable form, in order to fight the system. And it openly undermines our constitution leaving only on paper the right to work for all Colombians.

Eliminating the DTF is giving our constitution back the possibility of realizing it, it's like turning on the engines of industry. We will be able to tighten our belts, not as our leaders have asked us in the past, to starve to death, but quite the opposite, to take off, and seek a dignified life, to which we also have a right, as enjoyed by developed countries where the deposit interest rate is almost null.

The problem of money issuance is different, although it is also linked to the interest rate. Money, in an expanding economy, must increase, which is achieved through the issuing bank when it makes gold purchases, or acquires foreign currency either through credits or exports, or when it simply performs primary issuance.

Since foreign currency is only required to make purchases abroad, it is necessarily an error to have more quantities than necessary for this purpose. If reserves are accumulated in large quantities it is because somehow the free market of supply and demand has been intervened, which is not logical if we are going to apply the precepts of opening and free market. When reserves are held it is equivalent to delivering the internal money generation that our economy requires, in exchange for a debt, when in reality we can do the same without having to owe the favor, just by reviving the government's faculty to cover part of its fiscal deficit through primary issuance.

Therefore it is not at all convenient to confuse external investment with dollar flooding, which can be increased by raising the DTF interest rate, but which would mean displacing our workforce abroad, leaving Colombian families internally without the possibility of working. Is it fair?

That each country manufactures its own money to the extent of its own needs is appropriate, and lowering the DTF to the level of developed countries is returning to our companies equal conditions to face opening. Only then will we know what our entrepreneurs are capable of, meanwhile, we will continue talking about a massacre.
